# Form API

Most of the custom forms in Drupal extend FormBase class.

There are 3 main types of forms:
- A generic form. Extend `FormBase`
- A configuration form that enables administrators to update a module's settings. Extend `ConfigFormBase`
- A form for deleting content or configuration which provides a confirmation step. Extend `ConfirmFormBase`

*2 latter extend FormBase under the hood. Note that they have different set of required methods when you extend those.*

## Required Methods when extending FormBase

- `getFormId()`
> Should return string with unique ID for your form.

- `buildForm()`
```php
public function buildForm(array $form, FormStateInterface $form_state) {}
````
> Add any form element here to $form array. Should return $form variable. 

- `validateForm()`
```php
public function validateForm(array &$form, FormStateInterface $form_state) {}
```
> Access specific form value by $form_state->getValue('field_id') or all values by $form_state->getValues()
> 
> To set a validation error use $form_state variable like this:
```php
$form_state->setError($form['phone_number'], $this->t('The phone number is too short. Please enter a full phone number.'));
$form_state->setErrorByName('phone_number', $this->t('The phone number is too short. Please enter a full phone number.'));
```

- `submitForm()`
```php
public function submitForm(array &$form, FormStateInterface $form_state) {}
```
> You can set redirect here using $form_state->setRedirect()

## Required Methods when extending ConfigFormBase
- `getFormId()`
- `buildForm()`
- `getEditableConfigNames()`
```php
protected function getEditableConfigNames() {}
```
> Should return an array of config names strings.
- `submitForm()`
> You should save values to the config here.
> 
> ConfigFormBase class has a default implementation. But you can override if needed.

## Required Methods when extending ConfirmFormBase
- `getFormId()`
- `submitForm()`
- `getCancelUrl()`
> Should return Url object
- `getQuestion()`
> Should return string/translatable string

## Form page
Create `my_module.routing.yml` file.
```yml
example.form:
  path: '/example-form'
  defaults:
    _title: 'Example form'
    _form: '\Drupal\my_module\Form\ExampleForm'
  requirements:
    _permission: 'access content'
```

## Retrieving the Form Programmatically
You may need to render form inside custom Block for example.
```php
$form = \Drupal::formBuilder()->getForm('Drupal\example\Form\ExampleForm', $para,);
// OR
$form_object = new \Drupal\mymodule\Form\ExampleForm($something_special);
$form_builder->getForm($form_object);
```

## Altering form
You can alter existing forms or your custom forms using hooks:

- `hook_form_alter()`
- `hook_form_FORM_ID_alter()`

Usage example:
```php
function my_module_form_alter(&$form, \Drupal\Core\Form\FormStateInterface $form_state, $form_id) {
  $form['example']['#title'] = t('Test');
}
```

## Form Elements
Form elements are HTML elements represented as render array. You can set up form elements inside buildForm() method of your form class or in form alter hook.
Sample form element definition:
```php
$form['element'] = [
  '#type' => 'textfield',
  '#title' => $this->t('Element'),
];
```
Each form element accepts general properties. But different form element types can also have uniqe properties available only to them.

General properties:
- #title: (string) Title of the form element. Should be translated.
- #description: (string) Help or description text for the element. In an ideal user interface, the #title should be enough to describe the element, so most elements should not have a description; if you do need one, make sure it is translated. If it is not already wrapped in a safe markup object, it will be filtered for XSS safety
- #default_value: Default value for the element. See also #value.
- #required: (bool) Whether or not input is required on the element.
- #access: (bool) Whether the element is accessible or not; when FALSE, the element is not rendered and the user submitted value is not taken into consideration.
- #disabled: (bool) If TRUE, the element is shown but does not accept user input.
- #ajax: (array) Array of elements to specify Ajax behavior. See the Javascript API and AJAX Forms guides for more information.
- #prefix: (string) Prefix to display before the HTML input element. Should be translated, normally. If it is not already wrapped in a safe markup object, will be filtered for XSS safety.
- #suffix: (string) Suffix to display after the HTML input element. Should be translated, normally. If it is not already wrapped in a safe markup object, will be filtered for XSS safety.
- #required_error: (string) Override default error message "@field_title is required" will be used if this is undefined.
- #states: (array) Information about JavaScript states, such as when to hide or show the element based on input on other elements. Refer to FormHelper::processStates.
- #title_display: (string) Where and how to display the #title. Possible values: before, after, invisible, attribute (make it hover tooltip).
- #tree: (bool) TRUE if the values of this element and its children should be hierarchical in $form_state; FALSE if the values should be flat. See also #parents, #array_parents.
- #value: Used to set values that cannot be edited by the user. Should NOT be confused with #default_value, which is for form inputs where users can override the default value. Used by: button, hidden, image_button, submit, token, value.


Most used form element types:
- textfield
- select
- checkbox / checkboxes
- radios
- textarea
- number
- tel
- email
- date
- url
- range
- entity_autocomplete. Accepts unique properties:
```php
'#target_type' => 'node',
'#tags' => TRUE,
'#default_value' => $node,
'#selection_handler' => 'default',
'#selection_settings' => [
  'target_bundles' => ['article', 'page'],
],
'#autocreate' => [
  'bundle' => 'article',
  'uid' => <a valid user ID>,
],
```

Note that beside Form Elements, there are Render Elements as part of Drupal's Render API. They include types like this:
- container
- fieldset
- details
- and many more.


## Conditional Form Fields #states
Drupal's Form API #states property allows to easily show or hide, enable or disable, require or collapse form fields based on values selected or entered in other fields on that form or anywhere else on the page.

States that can be applied to a form field element:
- enabled
- disabled
- required
- optional
- visible
- invisible
- checked
- unchecked
- expanded
- collapsed

The following states may be used when checking values of other fields:
- empty
- filled
- checked
- unchecked
- expanded
- collapsed
- value

Examples:
```php
# 1
'#states' => [
   // Show this textfield only if the radio 'other' is selected above.
   'visible' => [
   // Don't mistake :input for the type of field or for a css selector --
   // it's a jQuery selector.
   // You can always use :input or any other jQuery selector here, no matter
   // whether your source is a select, radio or checkbox element.
   // in case of radio buttons we can select them by thier name instead of id.
   ':input[name="colour_select"]' => ['value' => 'other'],
   ],
],

# 2
'#states' => [
   // Show this textfield if the radio 'other' or 'custom' is selected above.
   'visible' => [
      ':input[name="colour_select"]' => [
          // User selected 'Other'.
          ['value' => 'other'],
          // Conditional logic. Allowed are the values or, xor, and.
          'or',
          // User selected 'Custom colour'.
          ['value' => 'custom'],
      ],
   ],
],

# 3
'#states' => [
   'visible' => [
     ':input[name="field_override_subject"]' => ['checked' => TRUE],
   ],
],

# 3
$form['example_field']['#states'] = [
  'visible' => [
    [':input[name="my_select_list"]' => ['value' => 'user']],
  ],
];

#4 Node form field
$form['field_some_checkbox']['widget'][0]['value']['#states'] = [ 
  'unchecked' => ['select[name="field_some_select"]' => ['value' => 'a-specific-value']],
];
```

## #process and #after_build

```php
$form['#process'][] = 'yourmodulename_form_process';
```
Can be used on form but more often added to an form element. Used to alter how element works/looks. Often used to break complex element into smaller parts (like when #radios element is turned to multiple #radio elements). You would mostly use it when you have created a custom form element.
```php
$form['#after_build'][] = 'yourmodulename_after_build';
```
Use it when you need to alter form after all other form alters has been done.

## AJAX
The #ajax property of a form element is an array. Here are the details of its known elements, all of which are optional:

- callback: The callback to invoke to handle the server side of the Ajax event. More information on callbacks is under "Setting up a callback to process Ajax".
> If you use 'callback', your callback method is a function, which will receive the $form and $form_state from the triggering form. You can use $form_state to get information about the data the user has entered into the form.
- wrapper: The HTML 'id' attribute of the area where the content returned by the callback should be placed. Note that callbacks have a choice of returning content or JavaScript commands; 'wrapper' is used for content returns.
- method: The jQuery method for placing the new content (used with 'wrapper'). Valid options are 'replaceWith' (default), 'append', 'prepend', 'before', 'after', or 'html'. See http://api.jquery.com/category/manipulation/ for more information on these methods.
- effect: The jQuery effect to use when placing the new HTML (used with 'wrapper'). Valid options are 'none' (default), 'slide', or 'fade'.
- speed: The effect speed to use (used with 'effect' and 'wrapper'). Valid options are 'slow' (default), 'fast', or the number of milliseconds the effect should run.
- event: The JavaScript event to respond to. This is selected automatically for the type of form element; provide a value to override the default. See RenderElement::preRenderAjaxForm for the type-specific defaults. Especially note that the event for submit, button and image_button is "mousedown" (not "click") for example!
- prevent: A JavaScript event to prevent when the event is triggered. For example, if you use event 'mousedown' on a button, you might want to prevent 'click' events from also being triggered.
- disable-refocus: Disable automatic refocus after an ajax call.
- progress: An array indicating how to show Ajax processing progress. Can contain one or more of these elements:
    - type: Type of indicator: 'throbber' (default), 'bar' or 'none'.
    - message: Translated message to display.
    - url: For a bar progress indicator, URL path for determining progress.
    - interval: For a bar progress indicator, how often to update it.
- url: A \Drupal\Core\Url to which to submit the Ajax request. If omitted, defaults to either the same URL as the form or link destination is for someone with JavaScript disabled, or a slightly modified version (e.g., with a query parameter added, removed, or changed) of that URL if necessary to support Drupal's content negotiation. It is recommended to omit this key and use Drupal's content negotiation rather than using substantially different URLs between Ajax and non-Ajax.
Note that if you use this url property, your route controller will be triggered with only the information you provide in the URL.

Examples of AJAX callback function:
```php
# Open modal dialog on AJAX.
public function ajaxCallback(array &$form, FormStateInterface $form_state) {
   $response = new AjaxResponse();
   $response->addCommand(new OpenModalDialogCommand(
      $this->t('Need help?'),
      "Help text",
      ['dialogClass' => 'test-popup', 'width' => 500]
   ));
   return $response;
}
# Simply replaces form with the updated version, and displays messages if those exist.
public function ajaxCallback(array &$form, FormStateInterface $form_state) {
   return $form;
}
```

## Dependency Injection in the form class
PHP 8 approach helps us to avoid creating propertied by ourselves. Add these two methods into your form class and include desired services.
```php
/**
 * Constructs a new CustomForm object.
 */
public function __construct(
  protected ExampleServiceInterface $exampleService,
  protected EntityTypeManagerInterface $entityTypeManager
) {}

/**
 * {@inheritdoc}
 */
public static function create(ContainerInterface $container) {
  return new static(
    $container->get('example_service'),
    $container->get('entity_type.manager')
  );
}
```
Note that extending FormBase gives you access to some predefined methods, so there is no need to inject them by yourself:
- `$this->currentUser()`
- `$this->messenger()`
- `$this->logger('channel')`
- `$this->configFactory()`

## Questions

::: code-group
``` [Question 1]
Which parameters does hook_form_alter() accepts?
```

``` [Answer]
(&$form, FormStateInterface $form_state, $form_id)
```
::::

::: code-group
``` [Question 2]
How to add additional validate function using hook_form_alter?
```

``` [Answer]
$form['#validate'][] = 'function_name'; // will be called last
```
::::

::: code-group
``` [Question 3]
How to add additional submit function using hook_form_alter?
```

``` [Answer]
$form['actions']['submit']['#submit'][] = 'function_name'; // will be called last.
// important is the fact that it should be added to "submit" button element, not to whole form as #validate
```
::::

::: code-group
``` [Question 4]
Create render array of the autocomplete of taxonomy terms with vid=category.
```

``` [Answer]
$form['category'] = [
   '#type' => 'entity_autocomplete',
   '#title' => t('Category'),
   '#target_type' => 'taxonomy_term',
   '#selection_settings' => [
      'target_bundles' => ['category'],
   ],
];
```
::::

::: code-group
``` [Question 5]
Automatically hide field "name" when checkbox "anonymous" is checked.
```

``` [Answer]
// We need to use #states
$form['name']['#states'] = [
   'invisible' => [
      ':input[name="anonymous"]' => ['checked' => TRUE],
   ],
];
```
::::
