---
title: Back-end - Custom Modules
---

# Custom Modules

Goal: Demonstrate ability to develop custom modules using Drupal API for extending Drupal functionality.


To illustrate the module creation process, you can follow along with the instructions on this page to create a custom module called `hello_world` (adapted from [Creating Custom Modules](https://www.drupal.org/docs/8/creating-custom-modules)).

## Create Module Skeleton

### Naming Your Module

From [Naming and placing your Drupal 8 module](https://www.drupal.org/docs/8/creating-custom-modules/naming-and-placing-your-drupal-8-module):
> There are some important rules to follow when selecting a machine name:
>
> - It must start with a letter.
> - It must contain only lower-case letters and underscores.
> - It must not contain any spaces.
> - It must be unique. Your module may not have the same short name as any other module, theme, or installation profile you will be using on the site.
> - It may not be any of the reserved terms : `src`, `lib`, `vendor`, `assets`, `css`, `files`, `images`, `js`, `misc`, `templates`, `includes`, `fixtures`, `Drupal`.

For example: `hello_world`

Once you've selected a machine name, create a new directory for your module inside `/modules/`. It is recommended to use your machine name.

For example: `/modules/hello_world`

### {modulename}.info.yml

By creating a `{modulename}.info.yml` inside your module, you notify Drupal that your module exists.

For example - `hello_world.info.yml`:

```
name: Hello World Module
description: Creates a page showing "Hello World".
package: Custom
type: module
core_version_requirement: ^10
```

### Module Keys

The following keys are available for modules:

- **name (required)** - The human-readable name. This will appear on the "Extend" page where the module is activated.
- **type (required)** - Indicates the type of extension, i.e., "module", "theme", or "profile". For modules this should always be set to "module".
- **description (optional)** - The description, displayed on the "Extend" page.
- **package (optional)** - Specifies a "package" that allows you to group modules together.
- **core_version_requirement (required)** - Specifies the version of Drupal core that the theme/module is compatible with. Usually ^10 || ^11 indicating Drupal 10 or 11.
- **php (optional)** - The minimum version of PHP required. Defaults to value of `DRUPAL_MINIMUM_PHP` constant.
- **version (optional)** - Specifies a version. For modules hosted on drupal.org, the version number will be filled in by the packaging script. Do not specify it manually, but leave out the version line entirely.
- **dependencies (optional)** - List of other modules a module is dependent upon e.g. drupal:views.
- **test_dependencies (optional)** - List of other modules a module is dependent upon for testing purposes. Test dependencies should be added and committed to your repo prior to writing tests that rely on those dependencies so that testbot can properly download them.
- **hidden (optional)** - Indicates whether or not to hide the module from the "Extend" page so that it cannot be enabled/disabled via the UI.
- **required (optional)** - Boolean value which means your module must be enabled and cannot be uninstalled.

More at [Let Drupal know about your module with an .info.yml file](https://www.drupal.org/docs/develop/creating-modules/let-drupal-know-about-your-module-with-an-infoyml-file)

## Adding a Controller

Module controllers should live inside `src/Controller` directory inside your module.

For example - `src/Controller/HelloController.php`:
```php
<?php

namespace Drupal\hello_world\Controller;

use Drupal\Core\Controller\ControllerBase;

class HelloController extends ControllerBase {

  /**
   * Display the markup.
   *
   * @return array
   */
  public function content() {
    return [
      '#type' => 'markup',
      '#markup' => $this->t('Hello, World!'),
    ];
  }

}
```

This example controller simply returns a render array containing the translatable string `'Hello, World!'`.

## Adding a Route

Next you can add a route, exposing the controller's content via URL.

For example - `hello_world.routing.yml`:

```
hello_world.content:
  path: '/hello'
  defaults:
    _controller: '\Drupal\hello_world\Controller\HelloController::content'
    _title: 'Hello World'
  requirements:
    _permission: 'access content'
```

After adding this route, clear your cache and then navigate to `/hello` in your browser to see the controller's returned content.

See [Essential APIs: Routing System](4.4-essential-apis-routing.md) for more details about the Drupal routing system.

## Adding a Menu Link

Next you can add a link for this module page under `Configuration` -> `Development` in the admin panel.

For example - `hello_world.links.menu.yml`:

```
hello_world.admin:
  title: 'Hello module settings'
  description: 'example of how to make an admin settings page link'
  parent: system.admin_config_development
  route_name: hello_world.content
  weight: 100
```

See [Essential APIs: Menu API](4.4-essential-apis-menu.md) for more details about the Menu API.

## Additional Resources
- [Creating Modules on drupal.org](https://www.drupal.org/docs/develop/creating-modules)
- [Naming and placing your Drupal modules on drupal.org - updated Feb 2023](https://www.drupal.org/docs/develop/creating-modules/naming-and-placing-your-drupal-module)

