---
title: Back-end - Essential APIs - Services and Dependency Injection
---

# Essential APIs - Services and Dependency Injection


From [Services and dependency injection in Drupal on Drupal.org updated July 2024](https://www.drupal.org/docs/drupal-apis/services-and-dependency-injection/services-and-dependency-injection-in-drupal)

In Drupal terminology, a service is any object managed by the `services container`.

Drupal 8 introduced the concept of services to decouple reusable functionality and makes these services pluggable and replaceable by registering them with a service container.

As a developer, it is best practice to access any of the services provided by Drupal via the service container to ensure the decoupled nature of these systems is respected. The [Symfony documentation](http://symfony.com/doc/current/book/service_container.html) has a great introduction to services.

As a developer, services are used to perform operations like accessing the database or sending an e-mail. Rather than use PHP's native MySQL functions, we use the core-provided service via the service container to perform this operation so that our code can simply access the database without having to worry about whether the database is MySQL or SQLlite, or if the mechanism for sending e-mail is SMTP or something else.


The Services and Dependency Injection Container concepts have been adopted by Drupal from the Symfony `DependencyInjection` component. A `service` (such as accessing the database, sending email, or translating user interface text) is defined (given a name and an interface or at least a class that defines the methods that may be called), and a default class is designated to provide the service. These two steps must be done together, and can be done by Drupal Core or a module. Other modules can then define alternative classes to provide the same services, overriding the default classes. Classes and functions that need to use the service should always instantiate the class via the dependency injection container (also known simply as the `container`), rather than instantiating a particular service provider class directly, so that they get the correct class (default or overridden).

See [Services and dependency injection in Drupal on Drupal.org updated July 2024](https://www.drupal.org/docs/drupal-apis/services-and-dependency-injection/services-and-dependency-injection-in-drupal) for more detailed information on services and the dependency injection container.


Services can depend on other services. 

For example `path_alias.manager` depends on `path_alias_storage`, `path_alias_whitelist`, `language_manager`, `cache.data` and `datetime.time`:

from `web/core/modules/path_alias/path_alias.services.yml`:

```yaml
  path_alias.manager:
    class: Drupal\path_alias\AliasManager
    arguments: ['@path_alias.repository', '@path_alias.whitelist', '@language_manager', '@cache.data', '@datetime.time']
```

This ensures these services are passed into the `path_alias.manager` constructor:

```php
<?php
class AliasManager implements AliasManagerInterface, 
  
  // ...
  
  /**
   * Constructs an AliasManager.
   *
   * @param \Drupal\path_alias\AliasRepositoryInterface $alias_repository
   *   The path alias repository.
   * @param \Drupal\path_alias\AliasWhitelistInterface $whitelist
   *   The whitelist implementation to use.
   * @param \Drupal\Core\Language\LanguageManagerInterface $language_manager
   *   The language manager.
   * @param \Drupal\Core\Cache\CacheBackendInterface $cache
   *   Cache backend.
   * @param \Drupal\Component\Datetime\TimeInterface|null $time
   *   The time service.
   */
  public function __construct(
    AliasRepositoryInterface $alias_repository,
    AliasWhitelistInterface $whitelist,
    LanguageManagerInterface $language_manager,
    CacheBackendInterface $cache,
    protected ?TimeInterface $time = NULL,
  ) {
    $this->pathAliasRepository = $alias_repository;
    $this->languageManager = $language_manager;
    $this->whitelist = $whitelist;
    $this->cache = $cache;
    if (!$time) {
      @trigger_error('Calling ' . __METHOD__ . '() without the $time argument is deprecated in drupal:10.3.0 and it will be required in drupal:11.0.0. See https://www.drupal.org/node/3387233', E_USER_DEPRECATED);
      $this->time = \Drupal::service(TimeInterface::class);
    }
  }

  // ...
}
?>
```

## Accessing Service Through the Container

When dependency injection is not applicable, you can use a service container to implement a service.

Plugin classes, controllers, and similar classes have `create()` or `createInstance()` methods that are used to create an instance of the class. These methods come from different interfaces, and have different arguments, but they all include an argument `$container` of type `\Symfony\Component\DependencyInjection\ContainerInterface`. If you are defining one of these classes, in the `create()` or `createInstance()` method, call `$container->get('myservice.name')` to instantiate a service. The results of these calls are generally passed to the class constructor and saved as member variables in the class.

More at [Services and Dependency Injection Container on Drupal.org](https://api.drupal.org/api/drupal/core%21core.api.php/group/container/10):



## Access Services using helper methods

If neither of the previous methods apply, Drupal can look up the service for you by using `\Drupal::service('service.name')`.

Drupal also provides many special methods for accessing common services. For example:

- `\Drupal::cache($bin)` - Retrieves a particular cache bin based on specified parameter.
- `\Drupal::config($name)` - Retrieves a configuration object based on specified parameter.
- `\Drupal::currentUser()` - Retrieves current user service.
- `\Drupal::database()` - Retrieves database service.
- `\Drupal::entityTypeManager()` - Retrieves the entity type manager service which is helpful for interacting with entities.

See [class Drupal](https://api.drupal.org/api/drupal/core%21lib%21Drupal.php/class/Drupal/10) for more helper methods.

## Service Tags

From [Service Tags on Drupal.org](https://api.drupal.org/api/drupal/core%21core.api.php/group/service_tag/10):

Some services have tags, which are defined in the service definition. Tags are used to define a group of related services, or to specify some aspect of how the service behaves. Typically, if you tag a service, your service class must also implement a corresponding interface. Some common examples:

- access_check: Indicates a route access checking service; see the [Menu and routing system topic](https://api.drupal.org/api/drupal/core%21lib%21Drupal%21Core%21Menu%21menu.api.php/group/menu/8.5.x) for more information.
- cache.bin: Indicates a cache bin service; see the [Cache topic](https://api.drupal.org/api/drupal/core%21core.api.php/group/cache/8.5.x) for more information.
- event_subscriber: Indicates an event subscriber service. Event subscribers can be used for dynamic routing and route altering; see the Menu and routing system topic for more information. They can also be used for other purposes; see <http://symfony.com/doc/current/cookbook/doctrine/event_listeners_subscribers.html> for more information.
- needs_destruction: Indicates that a destruct() method needs to be called at the end of a request to finalize operations, if this service was instantiated. Services should implement `\Drupal\Core\DestructableInterface` in this case.
- context_provider: Indicates a block context provider, used for example by block conditions. It has to implement `\Drupal\Core\Plugin\Context\ContextProviderInterface`.
- http_client_middleware: Indicates that the service provides a guzzle middleware, see <https://guzzle.readthedocs.org/en/latest/handlers-and-middleware.html> for more information.


Creating a tag for a service does not do anything on its own, but tags can be discovered or queried in a compiler pass when the container is built, and a corresponding action can be taken. See `web/core/lib/Drupal/Core/Render/MainContent/MainContentRenderersPass.php` for an example of finding tagged services:


```php
/**
 * Adds main_content_renderers parameter to the container.
 */
class MainContentRenderersPass implements CompilerPassInterface {

  /**
   * {@inheritdoc}
   *
   * Collects the available main content renderer service IDs into the
   * main_content_renderers parameter, keyed by format.
   */
  public function process(ContainerBuilder $container) {
    $main_content_renderers = [];
    foreach ($container->findTaggedServiceIds('render.main_content_renderer') as $id => $attributes_list) {
      foreach ($attributes_list as $attributes) {
        $format = $attributes['format'];
        $main_content_renderers[$format] = $id;
      }
    }
    $container->setParameter('main_content_renderers', $main_content_renderers);
  }

}
```

## Overriding Services

To override the default classes used for existing services do the following:

- Create a `[Module]ServiceProvider` class in the top-level of your module, but swap out `[Module]` for the camel-cased name of your module.  For example, the inline_form_errors module uses `InlineFormErrorsServiceProvider`.
- Service provider needs to implement `\Drupal\Core\DependencyInjection\ServiceModifierInterface` (which is commonly done by extending `\Drupal\Core\DependencyInjection\ServiceProviderBase`).
- Add an `alter()` method to require Drupal use your class instead.

Example from `web/core/modules/inline_form_errors/src/InlineFormErrorsServiceProvider.php`:

```php
<?php

namespace Drupal\inline_form_errors;

use Drupal\Core\DependencyInjection\ContainerBuilder;
use Drupal\Core\DependencyInjection\ServiceProviderBase;
use Symfony\Component\DependencyInjection\Reference;

/**
 * Overrides the form_error_handler service to enable inline form errors.
 */
class InlineFormErrorsServiceProvider extends ServiceProviderBase {

  /**
   * {@inheritdoc}
   */
  public function alter(ContainerBuilder $container) {
    $container->getDefinition('form_error_handler')
      ->setClass(FormErrorHandler::class)
      ->setArguments([
        new Reference('string_translation'),
        new Reference('renderer'),
        new Reference('messenger'),
      ]);
  }

}
```

## Decorating Services

From [symfony.com - How to Decorate Services](http://symfony.com/doc/current/service_container/service_decoration.html):

When overriding an existing definition (e.g. when applying the Decorator pattern), the original service is lost:

```yaml
# config/services.yaml
services:
  App\Mailer: ~

  # this replaces the old App\Mailer definition with the new one, the
  # old definition is lost
  App\Mailer:
    class: App\NewMailer
```

Most of the time, that's exactly what you want to do. But sometimes, you might want to decorate the old one instead (i.e. apply the Decorator pattern). In this case, the old service should be kept around to be able to reference it in the new one. This configuration replaces App\Mailer with a new one, but keeps a reference of the old one as `.inner`:

```yaml
# config/services.yaml
services:
  App\Mailer: ~

  App\DecoratingMailer:
    # overrides the App\Mailer service
    # but that service is still available as ".inner"
    decorates: App\Mailer
```

The `decorates` option tells the container that the `App\DecoratingMailer` service replaces the `App\Mailer` service. If you're using the default `services.yaml` configuration, the decorated service is automatically injected when the constructor of the decorating service has one argument type-hinted with the decorated service class.

If you are not using autowiring or the decorating service has more than one constructor argument type-hinted with the decorated service class, you must inject the decorated service explicitly (the ID of the decorated service is automatically changed to `.inner`):

```yaml
# config/services.yaml
services:
    App\Mailer: ~

    App\DecoratingMailer:
        decorates: App\Mailer
        # pass the old service as an argument
        arguments: ['@.inner']
```
The visibility of the decorated `App\Mailer` service (which is an alias for the new service) will still be the same as the original `App\Mailer` visibility.

```yaml
# config/services.yaml
services:
    App\DecoratingMailer:
        # ...
        decoration_inner_name: App\DecoratingMailer.wooz
        arguments: ['@App\DecoratingMailer.wooz']
```



 #### Decoration Priority

When applying multiple decorators to a service, you can control their order with the `decoration_priority` option. Its value is an integer that defaults to 0 and higher priorities mean that decorators will be applied earlier.

```yaml
# config/services.yaml
services:
    Foo: ~

    Bar:
        decorates: Foo
        decoration_priority: 5
        arguments: ['@.inner']

    Baz:
        decorates: Foo
        decoration_priority: 1
        arguments: ['@.inner']
```

The generated code will be the following:


```php
$this->services[Foo::class] = new Baz(new Bar(new Foo()));
```
More at [How to Decorate Services](http://symfony.com/doc/current/service_container/service_decoration.html)


## Resources
- [Services and dependency injection in Drupal on Drupal.org updated July 2024](https://www.drupal.org/docs/drupal-apis/services-and-dependency-injection/services-and-dependency-injection-in-drupal)
- [Services and Dependency Injection Container on Drupal.org](https://api.drupal.org/api/drupal/core%21core.api.php/group/container/10)
- [class Drupal](https://api.drupal.org/api/drupal/core%21lib%21Drupal.php/class/Drupal/10)
- [Service Tags](https://api.drupal.org/api/drupal/core%21core.api.php/group/service_tag/10)
- [symfony.com - How to Decorate Services](http://symfony.com/doc/current/service_container/service_decoration.html)





