# Creating Themes and Subthemes

In Drupal 10 you can create base themes and subthemes. A base theme provides some set of predefined styles and functionality that a frontend developer can base a subtheme upon. Any theme can be used as a base theme, even if it is a subtheme of some other theme.

## Core Themes

Drupal 10 comes with several preloaded themes, located in `core/themes/`.

1. **Olivero**: Olivero is a core theme and the new default theme for Drupal starting with version 9.4.0.
2. **Claro**: A clean, accessible and powerful administration theme based on the Drupal Design System.
3. **Stark**: Is not based on any other theme. It is intentionally styleless to demonstrate default Drupal HTML, CSS and Javacript from core and contrib modules.
4. **Starterkit**: The recommended approach for creating new themes. This is a command line tool which allows theme developers to easily start a new theme.
   For more information, consult the [Starterkit documentation on Drupal.org](https://www.drupal.org/docs/core-modules-and-themes/core-themes/starterkit-theme).
5. **Stable9**: This is a hidden, minimal base theme which serves as a default for new themes created via the Starterkit theme creation method.

## Choosing a Base Theme

Choosing a base theme is a big decision when creating a new Drupal theme as it lays the framework for the way you will be building your frontend. `Olivero` and `Claro` are the two standard base themes provided out of the box, although you could technically use `Stable9` and `Stark` as a base theme if you really wanted to.

The reason Drupal 10 provides two base themes is to appeal to two different groups of developers:

1. Developers who want sensible markup and default classes to apply CSS with minimal overrides.
2. Developers who want a minimalist theme that doesn't place unnecessary markup and css upon themers.

`Stark` was established for the minimalists, and `Olivero` was for those wanting sensible markup and classes.

But these are only two out of a theoretically infinite number of base themes you can choose from, including a custom base theme that is shared by all of your different projects.

You can also create a completely custom theme, but keep in mind that by doing so you are no longer guaranteeing backwards compatibility when core functionality changes.

## File Structure

Custom and third-party themes should be installed in `/themes/.

It is best practice to store themes in the following folder structure:

* **Contributed themes** should go in the `themes/contrib` folder.
* **Custom themes** should go in the `themes/custom` folder.

Inside each theme it is recommended to have `css`, `js` and `images` directories.

### `{themename}.info.yml`

Drupal automatically searches the themes directory looking for `{themename}.info.yml`.
This file provides information about your theme to Drupal.

For example - `mytheme.info.yml`:

```
name: MyTheme
type: theme
description: 'A subtheme'
core: 10.x
libraries:
  - substable/global-styling
  - substable/global-scripts
base theme: stable9
regions:
  header: Header
  content: Content
  sidebar_left: 'Sidebar - Left'
  sidebar_right: 'Sidebar - Right'
  footer: Footer
```

#### Theme Keys

Here is a list of available theme keys from [Defining a theme with an .info.yml file](https://www.drupal.org/docs/develop/theming-drupal/defining-a-theme-with-an-infoyml-file):

> - name *(required)*
>   The human-readable name. This will appear on the "Appearance" page where the theme is activated.
> - type *(required)*
>   Indicates the type of extension, i.e., "module", "theme", or  "profile". For themes this should always be set to "theme". This value  is case-sensitive.
> - base theme *(required)*
>   A theme can inherit the resources from another theme by [specifying it as a base theme](https://www.drupal.org/node/2165673). It is recommended to use the Starterkit method. If set to false, no base theme is being used. *(note,  if you change the base theme, uninstall and reinstall the theme to  ensure that the new base theme is correctly registered and enabled). *Note: Use the machine name of the base theme.
> - core\_version\_requirement *(required)*
>   Allows modules, themes, and profiles to specify that they are [compatible with multiple major versions of Drupal core](https://www.drupal.org/node/3070687).
>   Using `>=9.2` marks it as compatible with all versions of core from 9.2 and onward.
> - description *(optional)*
>   The description, displayed on the "Appearance" page.
> - dependencies *(optional)*
>   List of machine names of other themes necessary to be present and  installed to get this theme installed. The base theme is not necessary  to get listed here in extra.
> - package *(optional)*
>   Specifies a "package" that allows you to group themes together.
> - core *(required for Drupal 8)*
>   Specifies the version of Drupal core that the theme is compatible with. It can be omitted if you specify **core\_version\_requirement** and don't support Drupal 8.7.7 and below.
> - php *(optional)*
>   The minimum version of PHP required. Defaults to the value of `DRUPAL_MINIMUM_PHP` constant.
>   version *(optional)*Specifies a version. For themes hosted on drupal.org, the version  number will be filled in by the packaging script. Do not specify it  manually, but leave out the version line entirely.
> - libraries *(optional)*
>   A list of libraries (which can contain both CSS and JavaScript assets) to add to all pages where the theme is active. [Read more about themes and asset libraries.
> - libraries-override *(optional)*
>   A collection of libraries and assets to override. Read more at [Overriding and extending libraries](https://www.drupal.org/node/2216195#override-extend).
> - libraries-extend *(optional)*
>   A collection of libraries and assets to add whenever a library is attached. Read more at [Overriding and extending libraries](https://www.drupal.org/node/2216195#override-extend).
> - hidden *(optional)*
>   Indicates whether or not to hide the theme from the "Appearance" page so that it cannot be enabled/disabled via the UI.
> - engine *(optional)*
>   The theme engine. Defaults to "twig".
> - logo *(optional)*
>   The path to logo relative to the theme's `.info.yml`  file. By default, Drupal will look for a file named "logo.svg" in the  root of your theme folder and use that as the theme's logo.
> - screenshot *(optional)*
>   The path to screenshot relative to the theme's `.info.yml`  file. Screenshots should be 588 pixels wide and 438 pixels high, though  they are displayed at a smaller size. By default, Drupal will look for a  file named "screenshot.png" in the root of your theme folder and use  that as the theme image on the "Appearance" page.
> - regions *(optional)*
>   A list of theme regions. (Note that region keys are not preceded by a dash.) A `content` region is required. [Read more about adding regions to a theme.](https://www.drupal.org/node/2469113)
> - regions\_hidden *(optional)*
>   A list of inherited regions to remove.
> - features *(optional)*
>   A list of features to expose on the theme "Settings" page.
> - ckeditor\_stylesheets *(optional)*
>   A list of stylesheets to add to the CKEditor frame.
> - ckeditor5-stylesheets *(optional)*
>   A list of stylesheets to add to the CKEditor5 frame.

### `{themename}.libraries.yml`

If you wish to include JavaScript and CSS in your theme, you can do so by creating
libraries in `{themename}.libraries.yml`.

For example - `substable.libraries.yml`:

```
global-styling:
  version: 1.x
  css:
    theme:
      css/style.css: {}
      css/print.css: { media: print }
global-scripts:
  version: 1.x
  js:
    js/substable.js: {}
  dependencies:
    - core/jquery
```

Libraries also need to be included in the `{themename}.info.yml` file. See `substable.info.yml` example above.

See the [JavaScript/jQuery](../fundamentals/1.2-javascript-jquery.md) section for more information about JavaScript and attaching libraries to a subset of pages.

## Breakpoint Module

The `breakpoints` module allows you to predefine breakpoints for use in your
responsive design. Breakpoints are defined in a `{themename}.breakpoints.yml` file.

Here is an example from the [bootstrap](https://www.drupal.org/project/bootstrap) theme:

```
bootstrap.screen-xs-max:
  label: screen-xs-max
  mediaQuery: 'all and (max-width: 767px)'
  weight: 1
  multipliers:
    - 1x
bootstrap.screen-sm-min:
  label: screen-sm-min
  mediaQuery: 'all and (min-width: 768px)'
  weight: 1
  multipliers:
    - 1x
bootstrap.screen-sm-max:
  label: screen-sm-max
  mediaQuery: 'all and (max-width: 991px)'
  weight: 1
  multipliers:
    - 1x
bootstrap.screen-md-min:
  label: screen-md-min
  mediaQuery: 'all and (min-width: 992px)'
  weight: 1
  multipliers:
    - 1x
bootstrap.screen-md-max:
  label: screen-md-max
  mediaQuery: 'all and (max-width: 1199px)'
  weight: 1
  multipliers:
    - 1x
bootstrap.screen-lg-min:
  label: screen-lg-min
  mediaQuery: 'all and (min-width: 1200px)'
  weight: 1
  multipliers:
    - 1x
```

From [Working with breakpoints in Drupal](https://www.drupal.org/docs/theming-drupal/working-with-breakpoints-in-drupal):

> Please note that inputting your CSS breakpoints into your `breakpoints.yml` file is only necessary when Drupal needs to interact with the breakpoints as in the case of the Responsive Images module.

### Breakpoint Keys

- **label** - A human readable label for the breakpoint.
- **mediaQuery** - Media query text proper, e.g. 'all and (min-width: 851px)'.
- **weight** - Positional weight (order) for the breakpoint.
- **multipliers** - Supported pixel resolution multipliers.

### Breakpoint Groups

From [Working with breakpoints in Drupal 10](https://www.drupal.org/docs/10/theming-drupal-10/working-with-breakpoints-in-drupal-10):

> Breakpoints can be organized into groups. Modules and themes should use groups to separate out breakpoints that are meant to be used for different purposes, such as breakpoints for layouts or breakpoints for image sizing.

```yaml
yourtheme.group1.mobile:
  label: narrow
  mediaQuery: ''
  weight: 0
  multipliers:
    - 1x
  group: yourtheme.group1
yourtheme.group1.narrow:
  label: narrow
  mediaQuery: '(min-width: 560px)'
  weight: 0
  multipliers:
    - 1x
    - 2x
  group: yourtheme.group1
yourtheme.group1.wide:
  label: wide
  mediaQuery: '(min-width: 851px)'
  weight: 1
  multipliers:
    - 1x
    - 2x
  group: yourtheme.group1

yourtheme.group2.mobile:
  label: narrow
  mediaQuery: ''
  weight: 0
  multipliers:
    - 1x
  group: yourtheme.group2
yourtheme.group2.narrower:
  label: narrow
  mediaQuery: '(min-width: 400px)'
  weight: 0
  multipliers:
    - 1x
    - 2x
  group: yourtheme.group2
yourtheme.group2.wider:
  label: wide
  mediaQuery: '(min-width: 1001px)'
  weight: 1
  multipliers:
    - 1x
    - 2x
  group: yourtheme.group2
```

> You can also add breakpoints to breakpoint groups defined by other modules or themes, but you must use the full name.

```yaml
yourmodule.yourtheme.group2.superwide
  label: superwide
  mediaQuery: '(min-width: 1501px)'
  weight: 1
  multipliers:
    - 1x
    - 2x
  group: yourtheme.group2
```

## Adding Regions to a Theme

All regions should be declared in the theme info file. The keys match the machine name and the values match the label for each available region.

For example:

```
regions:
  header: Header
  content: Content
  sidebar_left: 'Sidebar - Left'
  sidebar_right: 'Sidebar - Right'
  footer: Footer
```

Then each region can be referenced in your `page.html.twig` file:

```twig
<div class="container">

  {% if page.header %}
    <div class="row">
      <div class="header col-xs-12">
        {{ page.header }}
      </div>
    </div>
  {% endif %}

  <div class="row">

    {% if page.sidebar_left %}
      <div class="sidebar-left col-xs-2">
        {{ page.sidebar_left }}
      </div>
    {% endif %}

    {% if page.sidebar_left and page.sidebar_right %}
      <div class="content col-xs-8">
        {{ page.content }}
      </div>
    {% elseif page.sidebar_left or page.sidebar_right %}
      <div class="content col-xs-10">
        {{ page.content }}
      </div>
    {% else %}
      <div class="content col-xs-12">
        {{ page.content }}
      </div>
    {% endif %}

    {% if page.sidebar_right %}
      <div class="sidebar-right col-xs-2">
        {{ page.sidebar_right }}
      </div>
    {% endif %}

  </div>

  {% if page.footer %}
    <div class="row">
      <div class="footer col-xs-12">
        {{ page.footer }}
      </div>
    </div>
  {% endif %}

</div>
```

**Default regions**

If you declare any regions in your theme, even just one, all the default regions will no longer be applied and you assume responsibility for declaring any and all regions you want to use.

## Additional Resources

- [drupal.org - Defining a theme with an .info.yml file](https://www.drupal.org/docs/develop/theming-drupal/defining-a-theme-with-an-infoyml-file)
- [drupal.org - Adding Stylesheets (CSS) and JavaScript (JS) to a theme](https://www.drupal.org/docs/develop/theming-drupal/adding-assets-css-js-to-a-drupal-theme-via-librariesyml)
- [drupal.org - Using Stable as a Base Theme](https://www.drupal.org/docs/develop/theming-drupal/sub-theming-using-stablestable-9-as-a-base-theme)
- [drupal.org - Working with breakpoints in Drupal 10](https://www.drupal.org/docs/theming-drupal/working-with-breakpoints-in-drupal)
